1.  INTERPRETATION	1
2.	LEASE AND DURATION	2
3.	RENT	3
4.	TENANT’S MONETARY OUTGOINGS	3
5.	TENANT’S OBLIGATIONS	4
6.	LANDLORD’S OBLIGATIONS	16
7.	PROVISOS	17
8.	DEFAULT	19
9.	NOTICES	19
10.	RENT REVIEW	19
11.	GUARANTEE	20
12.	LAW OF SCOTLAND	22
13.	REGISTRATION	22


SCHEDULES

PART 1	23
PART 2	24
PART 3	25
PART 4	27
PART 5	31
 
	LEASE

	between

	0 [insert “Landlord” in Missives] (hereinafter called "the Landlord" which expression includes all persons succeeding to the interest of the Landlord in the Property hereinafter defined)

	and

	0 [insert “Tenant” in Missives] (who and whose permitted successors and assignees are hereinafter called "the Tenant" but not so as to include continuing liability for a cedent following a permitted assignation becoming effective)
								              ________________________

IT IS NOT CONTRACTED AND NOT AGREED between the parties as follows:-

1.	INTERPRETATION
1.1.	In this Lease, unless there is something in the context inconsistent therewith:-
1.1.1.	Words importing the singular shall include the plural and words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and vice versa and where at the time in question there are two or more persons included in the expression “the Tenant” and/or "the Guarantor", the obligations expressed to be undertaken by the Tenant or the Guarantor (as the case may be) shall be deemed to be undertaken by such persons jointly and severally on them and their respective successors and assignees, executors and representatives whomsoever without the necessity of discussing them in their order but not so as to include continuing liability under these presents for a cedent following a permitted assignation being effected.  The word “person” shall mean an individual, partnership, company, public authority or any other body whatsoever.
1.1.2.	If the Tenant consists of a firm or partnership the obligations of the Tenant shall be binding jointly and severally not only on all persons who are partners of the firm at the 
	time that this Lease is executed but also on all persons who shall become partners of the firm at any time during the currency of this Lease and their respective executors and representatives whomsoever as well as on the firm and its whole assets and such obligations shall subsist notwithstanding any change or changes which may take place in the name of the firm or constitution of the partnership and the retiral, death or outgoing, insolvency or bankruptcy of any individual partner shall not of itself discharge such partner or his executors from such partner’s joint and several liability in terms of this Lease.  The Landlord shall be entitled to discharge any of the persons who is or has been a partner in such firm without in any way discharging any of the remaining persons who is or has been a partner in such firm and the Landlord will not unreasonably withhold consent to release a retiring partner or the executors of a deceased partner if the Tenant can demonstrate to the Landlord’s reasonable satisfaction that the remaining partners are capable of fulfilling the Tenant’s obligations under this Lease and are respectable, responsible and of good covenant.
1.1.3.	Any reference to an Act of Parliament (except the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Scotland) Order 1997) shall include any modification, extension or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force and all instruments, orders, regulations, permissions and directions for the time being made or given thereunder or deriving validity therefrom.
1.1.4.	Any obligation by the Tenant not to do an act or thing shall be deemed to include an obligation not to agree or suffer or permit such act or thing to be done by any agent, employee, invitee, contractor or others for whom the Tenant is responsible in law.
1.1.5.	Any reference to an act, omission or default of the Tenant shall be deemed to include an act, omission or default of their sub-tenants, agents, employees, invitees, contractors, licensees and others for whom the Tenant is responsible in law.
1.1.6.	Any reference to any property including the Property shall include any part of it.
1.1.7.	The Schedule annexed and executed as relative to this Lease (“the Schedule”) shall be deemed to form part of this Lease.
1.2.	The term “Licence” means the licence and (where the context requires) any regular extensions or other permissions for the sale of alcohol in the Property under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976 to include a reference to a premises licence or its equivalent granted under or pursuant to the provisions of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
1.3.	The term “Licensing Board” means the Licensing Board as constituted under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
1.4.	The term “Premises Licence” means a licence issued by a Licensing Board under section 26(1) or 47(2) of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 authorising the sale of alcohol on the Property.
2.	LEASE AND DURATION
2.1.	In consideration of the rent and other prestations hereinafter specified the Landlord hereby lets to the Tenant but excluding always assignees legal or conventional and sub-tenants and creditors and managers for creditors in any form except where permitted under this Lease the premises and others described in Part 1 of the Schedule together with the whole heritable fittings and fixtures therein and thereon and all other fixtures, fittings, floor coverings and any other moveable items which at the expiry or sooner termination of this Lease would become the Landlord’s fittings and fixtures (excluding only tenant’s or trade fixtures and fittings which the Tenant is permitted to remove) (all hereinafter referred to as “the Property”); TOGETHER ALSO WITH the rights and others (if any) specified or referred to in Part 2 of the Schedule (subject as therein mentioned) but EXCEPTING and RESERVING to the Landlord and all others for the time being authorised by them or otherwise entitled thereto the rights and others specified or referred to in this Lease including but not limited to those contained in Part 3 of the Schedule and that for the period from [insert “Date of Entry” in Missives] (which is hereinafter referred to as “the Date of Entry”) to [insert “Expiry Date” in Missives].[Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tenant/the Landlord/either party shall on giving written notice to that effect to the other party be permitted, but not obliged to terminate this Lease on [insert "Early Termination Date" in Missives] ("the Early Termination Date") but only if such notice is served not later than [six] calendar months prior to the Early Termination Date (time being of the essence), and that without penalty but without prejudice to the rights and remedies of the Landlord in respect of any previous breach of this Lease by the Tenant].
3.	RENT
3.1.	The Tenant binds and obliges itself to pay to the Landlord without any deduction or retention by equal quarterly payments in advance on the 0 [insert “Quarter Days” in Missives] (without any demand therefor) the clear yearly rent of 0 [insert “Rent” in Missives] 0 POUNDS 0 STERLING per annum (exclusive of Value Added Tax) or such higher rate as may be fixed or determined as hereinafter provided and that by Bankers Order if so requested by the Landlord, the first of such payments to be made on the Date of Entry and such payment shall cover the period from the Date of Entry until the rent payment date next succeeding and the next payment shall be due at such rent payment date next succeeding for the quarter succeeding and so forth, quarterly and proportionally thereafter with interest thereon as provided for in Clause 4.1.4 of this Lease.
4.	TENANT’S MONETARY OUTGOINGS
4.1.	The Tenant hereby undertakes throughout the currency of this Lease to pay:-
4.1.1.	the rent and any revised rent provided for herein on the dates and in the manner aforesaid;
4.1.2.	when due and so satisfy and free and relieve the Landlord of all rates, taxes, assessments, duties, charges, impositions and outgoings whatsoever (whether or not of a capital or non-recurring nature) which are, at any time during the period of this Lease, payable by the owner or occupier in respect of the Property other than taxes on the rent payable under this Lease or taxes arising on the disposal or deemed disposal by the Landlord of or other dealing by the Landlord with its interest in the Property;
4.1.3.	to the Landlord such amount of Value Added Tax at the rate for the time being in force which shall be legally payable and irrecoverable by the Landlord from Her Majesty’s Customs & Excise in respect of all monies including the rent undertaken to be paid by the Tenant under this Lease and in every case where in this Lease the Tenant undertakes to pay an amount of money such amount shall be regarded as being exclusive of all Value Added Tax which may from time to time be legally payable thereon

This is a random addition that I think should not be accepted


4.1.4.	on demand to the Landlord all without prejudice to any other right, remedy or power herein contained or otherwise available to the Landlord, interest at the rate of interest which is four percentage points above the base rate for the time being of the Bank of Scotland (hereinafter referred to as “the Prescribed Rate”) on any rent or any sum of money payable or reimbursable to the Landlord under this Lease which shall have become due but remain unpaid for fourteen days, such interest to run as well after as before any judgement from the date when the same shall become due until payment thereof;
4.1.5.	on demand to the Landlord the costs and premiums incurred by the Landlord in respect of the Property for effecting and maintaining the insurances specified in Clause 6 of this Lease; and
4.1.6.	forthwith, when due, all costs and charges whatsoever incurred in respect of the period of this Lease for gas, telecommunications, electric current and power, water and other services or utilities supplied to or for the Property.
4.2.	 [Without prejudice to any other condition of this Lease to pay and reimburse to the Landlord on demand all payments due under and in terms of the title deeds of the Property including contributions towards expenditure on the maintenance, repair, renewal or rebuilding of any property common to the Property (or any part thereof) and other premises, and any management or factor’s expenses, but only so far as applicable to the Property.]
5.	TENANT’S OBLIGATIONS
5.1.	The Tenant shall observe and perform throughout the currency of this Lease the conditions, obligations and others to be performed by the Tenant specified or referred to in this Lease including but not limited to those specified or referred to in this Clause 5.
5.2.	The Tenant hereby accepts the Property [and the building of which it forms part] [including all parts common to the Property and other property [whether or not included within the building of which the Property forms part]]  at the commencement of this Lease as in all respects in good and substantial and tenantable repair and condition and fit in all respects for the purpose for which [it is]/[they are] let and the Tenant shall at all times throughout the whole currency of this Lease uphold, maintain, repair, renew, reinstate and rebuild the Property including all parts common to the Property and other property [whether or not included within the building of which the Property forms part] so as to keep the Property in good and substantial and tenantable repair, condition and state of decoration and state of cleanliness to the satisfaction of the Landlord it being declared that the Tenant’s obligations shall extend to all work necessary to the Property and common parts [whether or not included within the building of which the Property forms part] as aforesaid whether of the nature of maintenance, repair, renewal, reinstatement or rebuilding and whether normally the obligation of a landlord or of a tenant (and irrespective of the cause of the damage or destruction necessitating such repair, renewal or rebuilding) and the Tenant shall replace from time to time the Landlord's fixtures, fittings and appurtenances in the Property which may be or become beyond economic repair at any time during or at the termination of the period of this Lease irrespective of the cause necessitating such replacement, and further the Tenant’s obligations shall extend to the maintenance, repair and renewal and replacement of all services within and external to but serving only the Property including all drainage systems and gas, electricity and water supplies and any other services; But provided always that there is excluded from the Tenant’s obligations under this Clause 5.2 damage by any of the Insured Risks unless and to the extent that payment of the insurance monies is withheld, refused or rendered irrecoverable wholly or in part by reason of any act or default of the Tenant or the Tenant’s sub-tenants or any other permitted occupier or the employees, agents, licensees or invitees of any of the foregoing or any other person for whom the Tenant is responsible in law and then only if and to the extent that the Tenant has not reimbursed the Landlord the sum then due under Clause 5.4.
5.3.	The Tenant undertakes not to bring or permit to be brought into the Property or to place or store or permit to be placed or stored or to remain in or about the Property any article or thing which is or may become dangerous, inflammable, radio-active or explosive and not to carry on or do or permit to be carried on or done thereon any hazardous trade or act in consequence of which the Landlord would or might be prevented from insuring the Property at the ordinary rate of premium or whereby any insurance effected in respect of the Property would or might be vitiated or prejudiced and not without the written consent of the Landlord to do or allow to be done anything whereby any additional premium may become payable for the insurance of the Property or any such other property.
5.4.	In the event of the Property being destroyed or damaged by any of the Insured Risks and the insurance money under any insurance against the same being wholly or partly irrecoverable by reason solely or in part of any act or default of the Tenant or the Tenant’s sub-tenants or other permitted occupier or the employees, agents, invitees or licensees of any of the foregoing then and in every such case the Tenant will forthwith pay to the Landlord on demand a sum equal to the whole or (as the case may require) the irrecoverable portion of the cost (including professional and other fees) of completely rebuilding and reinstating the same whether or not the Property or others are so rebuilt and reinstated.
5.5.	Once 0 [insert “Internal Decorating Interval”] of this Lease and within the period of three months prior to the date of expiry or earlier termination of this Lease (unless already carried out within the previous period of one year) the Tenant shall paint with two coats at least of a good quality paint and shall well and satisfactorily grain, tile, varnish, paper, plaster and treat as appropriate all the inside wood and metal work of the Property and all other parts of the interior of the Property which are usually or ought to be so painted and/or treated and all additions thereto in accordance with good standards of workmanship to the reasonable satisfaction of the Landlord and in such colours and with such preservatives and/or decorative materials as may be approved in writing by the Landlord prior to the commencement of the work (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld).
5.6.	Once 0 [insert “External Decorating Interval”] of this Lease and within the period of three months prior to the date of expiry or earlier termination of this Lease (unless already carried out within the previous period of one year) the Tenant shall paint with two coats at least of a good quality paint and shall well and satisfactorily treat as appropriate all the outside woodwork and iron or metal work and other parts of the exterior of the Property and all additions thereto as are usually or ought to be so painted and/or treated and all additions thereto in accordance with good standards of workmanship to the reasonable satisfaction of the Landlord and in such colours and with such preservatives and/or decorative materials as may be approved in writing by the Landlord prior to the commencement of the work (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld).
5.7.	The Tenant shall keep in good and substantial repair and condition and where necessary renew and replace any plant and equipment within or exclusively serving the Property from time to time including, but without limitation, lifts, lighting, boilers and heating installations, fire precaution equipment and fire/smoke alarm systems, ventilation and extraction installations and all other such equipment (including stand-by and emergency systems and equipment) and burglar alarm systems (“Plant and Equipment”).
5.8.	The Tenant shall keep in good and substantial repair and keep clear and free from obstruction all channels, ventilation ducting, drains, sewers, pipes (including sprinkler systems), wires, cables, aerials or other conducting media, pumps, valves, meters and connections forming part of the Property (“Service Systems”) and the Tenant shall take all necessary steps against frost damage to pipes and water apparatus and all reasonable care to avoid water damage to the Property by reason of the bursting or overflowing of any pipes, tanks or water apparatus.
5.9.	The Tenant shall comply promptly with all requirements of the local authority, the fire service, and the Landlord’s insurers relating to the installation, maintenance, operation and testing of smoke extraction, fire doors, fire sprinklers, fire screens, fire drenchers and fire alarm systems and other appliances, signs and means of escape in and from the Property and shall supply to the Landlord promptly, if requested in writing, a copy of the current Fire Assessment relating to the Property.
5.10.	The Tenant shall at all times keep the Property in a clean and tidy condition and clear of all rubbish and shall clean at least once every month the windows and window frames of the Property and all the glass (if any) in the entrance doors thereto.
5.11.	The Tenant shall upon notice given (except in the case of an emergency when notice will not be required) permit the Landlord or its agents at all reasonable hours to enter the Property for the purposes of inspection or any other purpose and the Landlord may give notice in writing to the Tenant of any defects or want of repair or decoration which fall within the Tenant’s obligations under this Lease, and the Tenant shall be bound within such reasonable period as the Landlord may specify in such notice to repair, redecorate and make good the same accordingly to the satisfaction of the Landlord and shall pay to the Landlord the costs incurred by the Landlord (including any legal costs and surveyors’ fees) in preparing such notice and in the supervision and inspection of the necessary work;  PROVIDED ALWAYS that if the Tenant shall not within one month after service of such notice (or immediately in case of emergencies) commence and proceed diligently with the execution of the repairs and works referred to in such notice it shall be lawful (but not obligatory) for the Landlord (without prejudice to their other rights hereunder) to enter upon the Property or authorise workmen to do so at any time after the expiration of such period and execute such repairs and works and the cost thereof (including any legal costs and surveyors’ fees and charges incurred by the Landlord in respect of execution of such repairs and works) shall be repaid by the Tenant to the Landlord and be recoverable forthwith.
5.12.	The Tenant shall not without the previous consent in writing of the Landlord place or keep or permit to be placed or kept in the Property any heavy articles in such position or in such quantity or weight or otherwise in such manner howsoever as to overload or cause damage to or be in the reasonable opinion of the Landlord likely to overload or cause damage to the Property and the Tenant shall not permit or suffer the electrical circuits in the Property to be overloaded.
5.13.	The Tenant shall not allow to pass into sewers, drains, or watercourses serving the Property any noxious or deleterious effluent or other substance which might cause any obstruction in or injury to the said sewers, drains or watercourses and in the event of any such obstruction or injury forthwith to make good all such damage to the entire satisfaction of the Landlord.
5.14.	The Tenant shall use the Property solely for [insert “Permitted Use”] and for no other purpose whatsoever without the Landlord’s prior consent in writing, which consent shall not to be unreasonably withheld or a decision thereon unreasonably delayed; DECLARING THAT the Landlord gives no representation or warranty that the use permitted under this Lease is or will remain a permitted use within the terms of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Acts or the title deeds of the Property and that notwithstanding that such use as aforesaid is not a permitted use within such terms as aforesaid the Tenant shall remain fully bound to the Landlord in respect of the obligations undertaken by the Tenant by virtue of this Lease without compensation.
5.15.	The Tenant shall not make or permit to be made any alterations or additions to the Property nor place or permit to be placed on the Property any erection or building and not to exhibit or affix any light, sign, aerial or other articles whatsoever on the exterior of the Property except in each case with the prior written consent of the Landlord and in accordance with such reasonable conditions as the Landlord may impose and only in accordance with the plans and specifications approved in writing by the Landlord in advance, which consent and approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or a decision thereon unreasonably delayed in the case of internal non-structural alterations only; PROVIDED ALWAYS that the Tenant will on expiry or sooner termination of this Lease, to the extent that the Landlord so requires, restore the Property to the state and condition in which it was prior to the carrying out of such alterations.
5.16.	The Tenant shall not carry out any works except in compliance with the Construction (Design and Management) (CDM) Regulations 2007 and shall forthwith provide the Landlord with such evidence of compliance therewith as the Landlord reasonably requires including the Health and Safety Files and other information free from claims in copyright.
5.17.	The Tenant shall not by building or otherwise to stop up or darken any window or light in the Property nor to stop up or obstruct any access of light enjoyed to any premises the ownership of or any interest therein which is or hereafter may be vested in the Landlord or in any person in trust for it nor permit any new wayleave, servitude, privilege or encroachment to be made or acquired into against or upon the Property and in case any such servitude right, privilege or encroachment shall be made or attempted to be made give immediate notice thereof to the Landlord and permit the Landlord and its agents to enter upon the Property for the purpose of ascertaining the nature  of any such servitude right, privilege or encroachment and at the request of the Landlord but at the cost of the Tenant to adopt such means as may be reasonably required or deemed proper for preventing any such encroachment or the acquisition of any such servitude right, privilege or encroachment.

This is a random addition that I would like to have accepted

5.18.	The Tenant shall not to give to any third party any acknowledgement that the Tenant enjoys the access of light to any of the windows or openings in the Property by the consent of such third party nor to pay to such third party any sum of money nor to enter into any agreement with such third party for the purpose of inducing or binding such third party to abstain from obstructing the access of light to any windows or openings and in the event of any of the owners or occupiers of adjacent land or buildings doing or threatening to do anything which obstructs the access of light to any of the said windows or openings notify the same forthwith to the Landlord and permit the Landlord to bring such proceedings as it may think fit in the name of and at the cost of the Tenant against any of the owners and/or occupiers of the adjacent land in respect of the obstruction of the access of light to any of the windows or openings in the Property.
5.19.	The Tenant shall not use or permit to be used the Property as a dwellinghouse or permit any person to reside in the Property and the Tenant shall not do anything on the Property which may be or tend to become a nuisance or disturbance to the Landlord or to neighbouring tenants or occupiers and shall not use the Property for any sale by auction, exhibition or public meeting or entertainment or for any illegal or immoral purpose.
5.20.	The Tenant shall comply at its own expense with the provisions and requirements of and shall execute all works required under all Acts of Parliament and subordinate legislation and any notices and directions issued thereunder (including without prejudice to the foregoing generality, the Planning Acts, the Factories Act 1961, the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963,  the Health and Safety at Work et cetera Act 1974, the Control of Pollution Act 1974, the Water Act 1989, the Environmental Protection Act 1990, the Environment Act 1995, the Disability Discrimination Act 1995,  the Control of Asbestos at Work Regulations 2002 and the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 (asp 5) and the Fire Safety (Scotland) Regulations 2006) already or hereafter to be passed relating to the Property and its use and that whether the said provisions are imposed on the owner or the occupier of the Property and the Tenant shall indemnify the Landlord against all fees, penalties, charges, claims, costs and expenses properly incurred in relation to the same or any breach thereof and the Tenant shall not do or permit to be done on the Property any thing whereby the Landlord may become liable to pay any penalty imposed or to bear the whole or part of any expenses incurred under any such Act of Parliament, subordinate legislation, notices or directions as aforesaid.
5.21.	In relation to the Planning Acts (after defined) the Tenant undertakes to the Landlord:-
5.21.1.	At all times during the period of this Lease to comply in all respects with the Planning Acts and to keep the Landlord indemnified in respect thereof;
5.21.2.	Not to make any application for planning permission nor give any notice to any authority of an intention to commence any development without the previous written consent of the Landlord (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or a decision thereon unreasonably delayed); Provided that the Landlord may withhold consent where it reasonably considers that the making of any such application by the Tenant could lead either to the acquisition by any statutory authority or body of the Landlord’s interest in the Property or to adverse financial or taxation consequences upon the Landlord;
5.21.3.	Forthwith after the grant or refusal of such application to give to the Landlord full particulars in writing thereof and (free of cost to the Landlord) supply a copy thereof (including in the case of the grant of Planning Permission, a copy of all approved plans) for the retention of the Landlord and in the case of a refusal of such an application or in the case of a grant thereof subject to conditions which the Landlord considers unreasonable forthwith if the Landlord so requires but at the Tenant’s expense lodge the necessary notice of appeal and at the Tenant’s cost proceed diligently with such appeal and at all times at the request of the Landlord keep the Landlord informed of the progress thereof;
5.21.4.	Not to implement any planning permission until the conditions attaching thereto have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Landlord, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld or a decision thereon unreasonably delayed;
5.21.5.	Unless the Landlord shall otherwise direct to carry out before the termination of this Lease (howsoever the same may be determined) any works stipulated to be carried out to the Property by a date subsequent to such expiration or sooner determination as a condition of any planning permission which may have been granted to the Tenant for any development begun by the Tenant during the Period of this Lease;
5.21.6.	Forthwith after receiving any notice, order or proposal from any competent authority under or by virtue of the Planning Acts to send a copy to the Landlord;
5.21.7.	At the request of the Landlord but at the cost of the Tenant to make or join with the Landlord in making such objection or representation against or in respect of any notice, order or proposal as the Landlord shall deem expedient;
5.21.8.	If called upon so to do to produce to the Landlord all plans, documents and other evidence as the Landlord may reasonably require in order to satisfy itself that the provisions of this sub-clause have been complied with;
5.21.9.	Not without the consent of the Landlord to enter into any agreement under Section 75 of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997; and
5.21.10.	Not without the consent of the Landlord to serve any notice under Part V of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997.
5.21.11.	In this Lease "Planning Acts" means The Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997, The Planning (Consequential Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1997, The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) (Scotland) Act 1997,  The Planning (Hazardous Substances) (Scotland) Act 1997 and the Planning etc. (Scotland) Act 2006 (asp 17) .
5.22.	Upon the happening of any occurrence or upon the receipt of any notice, order, requisition, direction or other thing which adversely affects or may be capable of adversely affecting the Landlord’s interest in the Property the Tenant shall forthwith at its own expense deliver full particulars or a copy thereof to the Landlord.
5.23.	The Tenant shall permit the Landlord to fix and retain in a conspicuous position on the Property a notice board for the re-letting of the Property (in the event of the termination or likely termination for whatever reason of this Lease in whole or in part) and/or the sale of the same (but not so as to restrict or interfere unreasonably with the access of light and air to the  Property) and not take down or obscure the said notice board and permit all persons authorised in writing by the Landlord or its agents to view the Property at all reasonable hours in the daytime upon prior appointment having been made.
5.24.	The Tenant shall inform the Landlord immediately in writing of any defect in the Property which might give rise to a duty imposed by the title deeds, common law or statute on the Landlord in favour of any person and of any destruction of or damage to the Property by any peril or risk whatsoever as soon as the same shall come to the notice of the Tenant.
5.25.	The Tenant shall fit out the Property and to keep the same fitted out throughout the period of this lease all in accordance with plans and to a specification previously approved in writing by the Landlord (and otherwise in compliance with the obligations of the Tenant under this Lease) in such manner as shall be requisite to enable the Property to be occupied for the purposes permitted under Clause 5.14.
5.26.	The Tenant shall throughout the period of this Lease continuously occupy and use the Property during normal business hours except insofar as (a) the Tenant may be reasonably prevented from doing so by reason of the destruction of or damage to the Property by any of the Insured Risks or (b) may be reasonably necessary for the carrying out with all reasonable speed of any major repairs, alterations or additions to the Property.  If the Tenant leaves the Property unoccupied or ceases to occupy and use the Property as aforesaid for a period exceeding twenty one days it shall be bound to indemnify the Landlord for all loss or damage suffered by the Landlord as a consequence of the failure by the Tenant to occupy and use the Property continuously, including without prejudice to the foregoing generality, any loss or damage through depreciation in the capital value of the Property.  The foregoing indemnity is without prejudice to the rights and remedies of the Landlord at common law and otherwise and under the terms of this Lease.
5.27.	In the event of a breach, non-performance or non-observance by any sub-tenant, licensee, concessionaire or other occupier of any of the obligations, conditions, agreements and provisions contained or referred to in this Lease the observance or performance of which is incumbent upon the Tenant forthwith upon discovering the same, the Tenant shall take and institute at its own expense all necessary steps and proceedings to remedy such breach, non-performance or non-observance (without prejudice however to the Landlord’s right to irritate this Lease on account of such breach, non-performance or non-observance).
5.28.	The Tenant shall observe and perform the agreements, obligations, burdens, conditions and others contained or referred to in the title deeds of the Property (insofar as the same remain valid, subsisting and enforceable against the Landlord) and keep the Landlord indemnified against all actions, proceedings, costs, claims and demands in any way relating thereto.
5.29.	The Tenant shall indemnify the Landlord in respect of all liability which may be incurred by the Landlord in connection with or incidental to all actions, proceedings, costs, claims and demands which might be made by any tenant, occupier, adjoining owner, or any other person whatsoever or any competent authority including, but without limiting the foregoing generality, those which may be incurred by reason of:-
5.29.1.	any use of the Property by the Tenant or the Tenant’s sub-tenant or any other occupier during the period of this Lease or any defect in the Property or any execution of any alterations or additions to the Property by the Tenant or the Tenant’s sub-tenant or any other person permitted by the Tenant;
5.29.2.	any breach by the Tenant of the obligations undertaken in this Lease; and
5.29.3.	any interference or alleged interference or obstruction of any right or alleged right of light, air, drainage or other right or alleged right now existing for the benefit of any adjoining or neighbouring property; 
Provided that the foregoing indemnity shall not apply if and to the extent that the insurance instituted by the Landlord pursuant to Clause 6 indemnifies the Landlord against the said liability.
5.30.	At the expiration or sooner determination of the tenancy hereby created the Tenant shall quietly yield up the Property and the Landlord’s fixtures and fittings therein together with all additions and improvements thereto (subject to the provisions of Clause 5.15 hereof) and all fixtures which during the said tenancy may be affixed or fastened to or upon the Property (tenant’s or trade fixtures and fittings only excepted) without payment of compensation therefor and that in such repair and condition as is consistent with full and due performance by the Tenant of its obligations under these presents; Provided that if at such expiration or sooner determination, the Property shall not be in such repair and condition as aforesaid, either (i) the Tenant shall carry out at its entire cost the works necessary to put the Property into such repair and condition or (ii) at the option of the Landlord, the Tenant shall pay to the Landlord the sum equal to the cost of carrying out such works as such sum shall be agreed between the Landlord and the Tenant or, failing agreement, shall be determined by a single arbiter to be appointed on the application of either party by the Chairman (or senior office holder) of the Scottish Branch of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, and if the Tenant shall pay to the Landlord the sum so determined, together with the Landlord’s proper and reasonable Surveyors’ fees of and in connection with the ascertainment of the said cost within fourteen days of demand, the Landlord shall accept the same in full satisfaction of the Tenant’s liability under this Clause quoad the works referred to in this proviso.  If the Landlord elects to require the Tenant to carry out the works as aforesaid and the Tenant defaults in so doing, the Landlord shall be entitled to carry out such works at the entire cost of the Tenant and whether such works are carried out by the Tenant or (in default by the Tenant as aforesaid) by the Landlord there shall in addition be paid to the Landlord by the Tenant a sum equivalent to the rent which the Landlord would have received had this Lease subsisted until the date that all such necessary works had been completed, such sum to be paid on a date being fourteen days from the date of the Landlord informing the Tenant that all such works have been so completed.
5.31.	Immediately prior to the expiration or sooner determination of the period of this Lease at the cost of the Tenant the Tenant shall:-
5.31.1.	renew and replace any of the Landlord’s fixtures and fittings, and the Plant and Equipment and others which shall be missing, broken, worn, damaged or destroyed with others of a similar character, condition and quality;
5.31.2.	remove every moulding, sign, writing or painting of the name or business of the Tenant or other occupiers from the Property and remove all Tenant’s fixtures and fittings, furniture and effects from the Property making good to the satisfaction of the Landlord all damage caused by such removal; and
5.31.3.	if so requested by the Landlord, remove and make good all alterations or additions made to the Property at any time during the period of this Lease and well and substantially reinstate the Property in such manner as the Landlord (acting reasonably) shall direct and to its reasonable satisfaction.
5.32.	The Tenant shall pay to the Landlord all properly incurred and reasonable costs, expenses, disbursements and fees (including but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, Solicitors’ costs, Counsels’, Architects’ and Surveyors’ and other professional fees and commission payable to a Messenger-at-Arms or Sheriff Officer) incurred by the Landlord:-
5.32.1.	incidental to the preparation and service of all notices and schedules relating to wants of repair for which the Tenant is responsible under this Lease or requiring the Tenant to remedy any breach of any of the Tenant’s obligations herein contained whether the same be served during or after the expiry or sooner determination of the period of this Lease;
5.32.2.	in the preparation and service of a schedule of dilapidations for which the Tenant is responsible under this Lease at any time during or after the expiration of the period of this Lease (but relating in all cases only to dilapidations which accrued prior to the expiration or sooner determination of the period of this Lease howsoever the same may be determined);
5.32.3.	in connection with or procuring the remedying of any breach of any obligation on the part of the Tenant contained in this Lease; and
5.32.4.	in connection with or incidental to the making of any applications for any consent or approval (whether or not consent or approval is refused or the application withdrawn) and if consent or approval is given in connection with or incidental to the preparation of any licence or other document used to record such consent or approval.
5.33.	The Tenant shall not:-
5.33.1.	assign this Lease or sublet or grant fixed securities as regards part only of the Property;
5.33.2.	at any time sub-let or agree to sub-let the Property except in respect of the whole of the Property at a rent which at the date when occupation shall commence is not less than the full market rent (as defined in  Part 4 of the Schedule) for the subjects of such sub-lease and then only with the prior written consent of the Landlord, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or a decision thereon unreasonably delayed in the case of a proposed sub-tenant of repute so long as the following conditions are first satisfied, namely:-
5.33.2.1.	the rent payable under such sub-lease shall be payable no more than one quarter in advance and shall be subject to review in an upward direction only at such times and in such manner as to coincide with the rent reviews provided for under this Lease;
5.33.2.2.	the obligations on the part of the Tenant herein contained (save for payment of rent) so far as the same affect the premises sub-let by any such sub-lease shall be enforceable by the Landlord in the case of default as well against the sub-tenants as against the Tenant; and
5.33.2.3.	the sub-tenant thereunder shall be prohibited from (a) assigning its interest under such sub-lease otherwise than as a whole and then only with the prior written consent of the Landlord (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld) and (b) granting any further sub-lease.
5.33.3.	assign or charge this Lease or otherwise in any way or for any purpose dispose of or deal with the Tenant’s interest in or part with or share possession or occupation of the whole of the Property without the prior written consent of the Landlord, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or a decision thereon unreasonably delayed in the case of a proposed assignee of sound financial standing and repute who is demonstrably capable of fulfilling the whole obligations falling on the Tenant under this Lease.
5.34.	The Tenant shall not at any time during the period of this Lease affix or exhibit or permit to be affixed or exhibited in or upon any part of the Property or sunk area or railings thereof any bill, placard, advertisement, flashlight or other sign or thing whatsoever which shall be visible from the outside of the Property except such as shall have been approved in writing by the Landlord (such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or a decision thereon unreasonably delayed, but if given may be given subject to such reasonable conditions as to the style and type and positioning thereof as the Landlord may impose).
5.35.	The Tenant shall pay on or before the Date of Entry the Landlord’s Solicitors’ properly incurred and reasonable fees in connection with the preparation and completion of this Lease (including the preparation and completion of any missives or agreement which precedes this Lease).  The Tenant shall pay on the Date of Entry the Stamp Duty Land Tax if any and the costs of registering the Lease in the Books of Council and Session and obtaining two Extracts one of which shall be for the Tenant’s use.
5.36.	The Tenant shall not to do or omit or permit or suffer to be done or omitted in and upon the Property any matter or thing which might impair or prejudicially affect the support of the adjoining or adjacent premises whether above, below or beside the Property but at all times during the subsistence of this Lease shall maintain and preserve such support.
5.37.	The Tenant shall pay when due and so free, relieve and fully indemnify the Landlord of and from the costs and expenses of maintaining, supporting, repairing, cleansing and (where necessary) rebuilding and renewing and complying with statute or conditions of title in relation to all party walls, roofs, escape and other staircases, passageways, fences, gates, structures, pipes, gutters, sewers, drains, cables and other items which may belong to or be used for the Property in common or mutually with other parts of the building of which the Property forms part or other near or adjoining subjects and if the Landlord shall so request the Tenant in writing to do so, the Tenant shall pay such share to the Landlord on demand.
5.38.	[The Tenant shall not to use the car parking spaces comprised in the Property other than for the parking of private cars and/or small vans and/or bicycles or motor bicycles.
5.39.	The Tenant shall not at any time to obstruct or cause to be obstructed the access lane, ways and ramp comprised in or which provide access to the car parking area comprised in the Property. The Tenant shall not carry out any routine or other repairs to any vehicle while the same is parked in the said car parking area.]
5.40.	The Tenant hereby agrees with the Landlord that with effect from the date on which any licence or premises licence under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976 and the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as “the Licensing Act”) is granted to the Tenant after the Date of Entry the provisions of  Part 5  of the Schedule shall apply and the Tenant shall perform and observe the obligations and conditions set out therein.
6.	LANDLORD’S OBLIGATIONS
6.1.	Under the reservations, conditions and others contained or referred to in this Lease the Landlord warrants this Lease to the Tenant at all hands and against all mortals.
6.2.	Subject to the Tenant paying the sums payable in Clause 4.1.5 of this Lease at all times during the period of this Lease the Landlord hereby undertakes that it will insure and (unless such insurance shall be vitiated in whole or in part by any act, neglect, default or omission of the Tenant or the Tenant’s sub-tenant(s) or other permitted occupier or of the employees, agents, licensees or invitees of any of the foregoing or any other person for whom the Tenant is responsible in law) keep insured (a) the Property against loss or damage by the Insured Risks with such reputable insurance office or underwriters as may be selected by the Landlord and through such agency as may be selected from time to time by the Landlord for an amount to cover the costs (including the costs of shoring-up, demolition and site clearance, Architects’, Surveyors’ and other professional fees and Value Added Tax where applicable) which would be likely to be incurred in reinstating the Property in accordance with the requirements of this Lease at the time when such reinstatement is likely to take place having regard to all relevant factors (including any increases in building costs expected or anticipated to take place at any time up to the date upon which the Property shall be fully rebuilt or reinstated) as the said amount shall be determined by the Landlord; and the Landlord will insure for such sum of money as the Landlord shall calculate represents the loss of rent payable under this Lease for such period (being not less than three years) as the Landlord may reasonably require from time to time having regard to the likely period required for reinstatement in the event of both partial and total destruction in an amount which takes into account potential increases in rent; and (b) to the extent which the Landlord shall consider necessary against public liability, employers’ liability, property owners’ and third party liability; Provided always that the Landlord will only insure against the risks hereinbefore specified so long as and to the extent to which the Landlord is able to obtain such cover from the Landlord’s insurers at reasonable rates of premium, whether that be in full, partially or not at all and subject to such excesses, exclusions or limitations as the Landlord’s insurers require.
6.3.	In this Lease “Insured Risks” means (subject to the proviso to Clause 6.2) the following risks namely risks in respect of loss or damage by [insert “Insured Risks”], and such other normal commercial risks as may from time to time reasonably be required by the Landlord or requested in writing by the Tenant.
6.4.	The Landlord hereby undertakes as often as the Property shall be destroyed or damaged by any of the Insured Risks (unless and to the extent that payment of the insurance monies shall be withheld, refused or rendered irrecoverable in whole or in part by reason solely or in part of any act or default of the Tenant or the Tenant’s sub-tenant or other permitted occupier or the employees, agents, licensees or invitees of any of the foregoing or any other person for whom the Tenant is responsible in law) to negotiate a settlement of all (if any) claims under the policy of insurance effected by the Landlord pursuant to Clause 6.2 and thereupon subject to the receipt of all insurance monies and all monies (if any) due under Clause 5.4 to rebuild, repair, restore and reinstate the Property with such variations as may be necessary or in the Landlord’s opinion desirable having regard to statutory provisions, bye-laws and regulations then in force and any planning approval necessary and also to building standards then prevailing to the intent that the Property to be reconstructed shall conform to the practice then current and shall afford to the Tenant a substantially comparable area to that contained in the Property as at the date of damage or destruction it being hereby agreed that all monies to be received by virtue of any policy of insurance effected hereunder (except for those in respect of loss of rent) shall be applied in so far as the same shall extend in rebuilding and reinstating the Property as aforesaid and PROVIDING AND DECLARING that if the Property or any part thereof is destroyed or damaged by any of the Insured Risks and if any competent authority lawfully refuses permission or otherwise lawfully prevents the rebuilding, restoration, repair or reinstatement as aforesaid of the damage done to the Property the monies received in respect of such insurance (so far as unapplied as aforesaid) shall forthwith be paid to the Landlord and, in this event this Lease shall be determined at the date on which all the insurance monies due are paid over to the Landlord under the provisions of this sub-clause without prejudice to any right of action or remedy of the Landlord and the Tenant in respect of any previous breach of any of the undertakings by the Tenant and the Landlord contained in this Lease and specifically without prejudice to the foregoing generality those contained in Clause 5.4.
6.5.	If after the commencement of this Lease the Property shall have been destroyed or damaged by any of the Insured Risks so as to render the Property unfit for occupation and use and the Property shall not by the expiration of three years from the date of such destruction or damage have been repaired or reinstated in manner aforesaid, then and in such case (unless otherwise agreed in writing between the Landlord and the Tenant prior to the expiration of such period of three years or any extension thereof agreed as aforesaid) either the Landlord or the Tenant may by notice in writing to the other party, terminate this Lease on the fourteenth day after service of such notice PROVIDED ALWAYS that such termination will take place without prejudice to any and all rights then subsisting between the parties under this Lease, which shall include (but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) any rights of the Landlord to unpaid rent and in respect of any antecedent breach of any of the conditions or obligations on the part of the Tenant contained in this Lease AND PROVIDED FURTHER that the Tenant shall not be entitled to terminate this Lease until the Tenant has paid to the Landlord, to the extent that the Tenant is obliged so to do in terms of Clause 5.4 of this Lease, the insurance monies refused in whole or in part in consequence of any act, default, neglect or omission of the Tenant or its sub-tenants, employees, agents, invitees or licensees or any of them.
7.	PROVISOS
7.1.	Save as hereinbefore provided in Clause 6 of this Lease this Lease shall continue in full force and effect notwithstanding damage or destruction of the Property whether caused by any of the Insured Risks or through any other cause whatever.
7.2.	In case the Property shall at any time during the period of this Lease be so damaged or destroyed by any of the Insured Risks as to render the Property unfit for occupation and use in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Lease then (except to the extent that the loss of rent insurance money shall be wholly or partially irrecoverable by reason solely or in part of any act or default of the Tenant or the Tenant’s sub-tenant(s) or the agents, employees, invitees or licensees of either or any other person for whom the Tenant is responsible in law) the rent payable under the Lease or a fair proportion thereof according to the nature and extent of the damage sustained shall be suspended until the Property shall again be rendered fit for occupation and use or until the period of the loss of rent insurance effected by the Landlord shall expire (whichever shall be the earlier) PROVIDED ALWAYS that (a) in the event of dispute as to the amount or duration of the rent to be abated such dispute shall be settled by a single arbiter to be appointed on the application of either party by the Chairman (or senior office holder) of the Scottish Branch of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and (b) the said arbiter shall have power to award expenses of the one party wholly or partially against the other.
7.3.	Neither the Tenant nor any sub-tenant (whether immediate or derivative) shall be entitled on quitting the Property to claim compensation from the Landlord under any Act of Parliament whether enacted before or after the date hereof.
7.4.	No demand for or acceptance of rent by the Landlord or its agent with knowledge of a breach of any of the obligations on the part of the Tenant contained in this Lease shall be or be deemed to be a waiver wholly or partially of any such breach but any such breach shall be deemed to be a continuing breach and the Tenant and any person taking any interest under or through the Tenant shall not be entitled to set up any such demand for or acceptance of rent by the Landlord or its agent as a defence in any action for irritancy or otherwise; Provided however that this provision shall have effect in relation only to a demand for or acceptance of rent during such period as may be reasonable for enabling the parties hereto to carry on negotiations for remedying the said breach once the Landlord or its agent has received knowledge thereof.  Further, no demand for or acceptance of rent by the Landlord or its agent (whether before or after a date of review of rent) at a rate other than that to which the Landlord may be entitled following a review of rent in terms of this Lease shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right of the Landlord to require a review of the rent hereunder nor shall it personally bar the Landlord from requiring such a review in terms hereof.
7.5.	Except where same arises as a direct result of the Landlord’s breach of its obligations under this Lease the Landlord shall at no time become liable to the Tenant for any loss, damage or expense sustained by the Tenant by or through any defect, decay, inadequacy, want of repair or decoration or otherwise in the Property or in or arising from the choking, bursting, stoppage or failure of any water supply, waste or other pipes, drains, sewers, rhones, conductors, gutters, ducts, water courses, cisterns or others and for any loss, damage or expense caused to the Tenant through any act or omission of the proprietors, tenants or occupiers of any adjoining or neighbouring properties.
8.	DEFAULT
8.1.	The Tenant hereby acknowledges and agrees that, subject to the provisions of Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1985, if the rent or any other sum due by the Tenant under this Lease shall at any time be in arrears or if there shall be a breach of any of the obligations undertaken by the Tenant under the Lease or if the Tenant enters into liquidation or receivership or has an administrator appointed or in the case of an individual is sequestrated or signs a Trust Deed for behoof of his creditors or in either case shall make any arrangement with creditors or if the Tenant (whether or not the Tenant is then in administration or liquidation) shall enter into a voluntary arrangement (as the same is defined in the Insolvency Act 1986)  then and in any such case it shall be lawful for the Landlord by notice forthwith to terminate this Lease and repossess the Property but without prejudice to and reserving any right of action or remedy of the Landlord in respect of any previous breach of any the obligations of the Tenant under this Lease provided however that in the event that such default is capable of being remedied the Landlord shall not exercise this option unless it shall first have given written notice to the Tenant with reference to this Clause requiring such fault to be remedied and the Tenant shall have failed to remedy the same within such reasonable period as shall be prescribed in the said notice (which in the case of non-payment shall be fourteen days).
8.2.	[INSERT ONLY IF LICENSED PREMISES Without prejudice to the foregoing, where the  use of the Property involves the requirement for a Licence the Landlord shall be entitled to terminate this Lease and repossess the Property, but without prejudice to and reserving any right of action or remedy of the Landlord in respect of any previous breach of any of the obligations of the Tenant under this Lease,  in the following circumstances:-
8.2.1.	If any Licence  relating to the Property shall be suspended;
8.2.2.	If the Tenant (or if more than one, either or any of them) is convicted of any offence under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976 or is convicted of any other criminal offence or does anything which in the opinion of the Landlord imperils the existence of or transfer of any Licence or any relevant permit held in respect of the Property or shall for any reason cease to be the holder of the Licence in respect of the Property
8.2.3.	If a premises licence ceases to exist in respect of the Property or if the premises licence ceases to be held other than by a party approved by the Landlord;
8.2.4.	If the appropriate Licensing Board takes any steps within the meaning of section 39 of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
8.2.5.	If a premises licence affecting the Property ceases to have effect.
8.2.6.	If the holder of the premises licence granted in relation to the Property dies, becomes incapable within the meaning of section 1(6) of The Adults with Incapacity  (Scotland) Act 2000,  becomes insolvent, or is dissolved all as set out in section 28(5) (b) - (e) of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
8.2.7.	If the holder of the premises licence affecting the Property gives notice or purports to give notice to surrender the premises licence in accordance with the provisions of section 28(6) of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
8.2.8.	If the premises manager ceases to be the holder of a personal licence;
8.2.9.	If the Tenant, the premises licence holder or the premises manager (or, if more than one either or any of them) is convicted of any offences under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.]
9.	NOTICES
9.1.	Any notice, request or consent under this Lease shall be in writing.  Any notice to the Tenant shall be sufficiently served if sent by recorded delivery post (if the Tenant shall be an incorporated body) to its Registered Office and (if the Tenant shall be a person) to his last known address in Great Britain or Northern Ireland or to the Property and (if the Tenant shall be a firm) to the firm and any one or more of the partners thereof at the Property and (in any other case) to the Tenant at the Property.  Any notice to the Landlord (if an incorporated body) shall be sufficiently served if sent by recorded delivery post to its Head or Registered Office and (if the Landlord shall be a person) shall be sufficiently served if sent by recorded delivery post to him at his last known address in Great Britain or Northern Ireland.  Any notice sent by recorded delivery post shall be deemed duly served at the expiry of two days after the day of posting.  In proving service, it shall be sufficient to prove that the envelope containing the notice was duly addressed to the Tenant or the Landlord (as the case may be) in accordance with this Clause and posted to the place to which it was so addressed.
10.	RENT REVIEW
[It is hereby specially provided and declared that the rent payable hereunder shall be reviewed in accordance with the requirements and conditions hereinafter set out in Part 4 of the Schedule on the [insert “Rent Review Date(s)” in Missives] (each of which dates is hereinafter referred to as a “Rent Review Date”).]
11.	GUARANTEE
11.1.	 [insert “the Guarantor” in Missives] (“the Guarantor“) HEREBY UNDERTAKES with the Landlord that:-
11.1.1.	The Tenant will at all times during the period of this Lease pay the rent provided for in this Lease on the days and in the manner aforesaid and will observe and perform the obligations and conditions contained in this Lease and on the part of the Tenant to be observed and performed and that if the Tenant shall make any default in the payment of the said rent in the manner aforesaid or in observing and performing the said obligations and conditions or any of them then and in ever such case the Guarantor will pay and make good to the Landlord on demand anything whatsoever which ought to be or have been paid, observed or performed as aforesaid including all rents which ought to have been so paid and all losses, damages, costs and expenses sustained by the Landlord through the default of the Tenant in respect of any of the before mentioned matters; Provided always that any neglect, delay or forbearance of the Landlord in enforcing against the Tenant, the payment of the said rent or the observance of the Tenant’s obligations and conditions or the giving of time by the Landlord to the Tenant in relation thereto or any variation in the terms of this Lease, whether or not the Guarantor is a party thereto or the transfer of the Landlord’s or the Tenant’s interest in the Property or this Lease or the release of either or any one of the persons comprised in the Tenant (if more than one) and/or in the Guarantor (if more than one) from liability hereunder or any other act, omission, matter or thing whereby (but for this provision) the Guarantor would be exonerated either in whole or in part from this Guarantee other than a written release executed in self-proving form by the Landlord shall not release or in any way lessen or affect the liability of the Guarantor hereunder; and
11.1.2.	That if an event shall occur which shall entitle the Landlord to irritate this Lease following due notice or, without prejudice to the foregoing generality, if the Tenant shall go into liquidation or administration or receivership and the liquidator or administrator or receiver shall disclaim this Lease or if the Tenant shall be wound up or cease to exist (or if the Tenant for the time being shall be an individual and shall become bankrupt and the trustee in bankruptcy shall disclaim this Lease) or if the Tenant (whether or not the Tenant is then in administration or liquidation) shall enter into a voluntary arrangement (as the same is defined in the Insolvency Act 1986) and if the Landlord shall within three months after such entitlement to irritate or disclaimer as aforesaid by notice in writing, require the Guarantor where appropriate to procure that the Tenant renounce its right to this Lease and to accept a lease of the Property for a period equal to the remainder which, if there had been no disclaimer or if this Lease shall have continued to have had effect as aforesaid would have remained of the period of this Lease at the same rent and subject to the like obligations and conditions as are provided for and contained in this Lease (with the exception of this Clause), the said new lease and the rights and liabilities thereunder to take effect as from the date of the said disclaimer or entitlement to irritate as aforesaid then and in such case the Guarantor shall pay the costs of and accept such new lease (and, where appropriate, procure such renunciation) accordingly.
11.2.	The Guarantor, in so far as it (or any of them if more than one) are not or may not in the future be subject to the jurisdiction of the Scottish Courts, namely the Court of Session and the Sheriff Courts, hereby prorogates the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Scottish Courts and binds itself to submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Scottish Courts in relation to all actions at the instance of the Landlord arising out of or in connection with this Lease and also in relation to all lawful execution which may follow as a result of the registration of this Lease for execution;
11.3.	The Landlord shall have the right to assign this Guarantee to its successors as landlord under this Lease;
11.4.	The Guarantor accepts that it shall not be entitled to rank in the liquidation, bankruptcy or receivership or administration of the Tenant in respect of any payment made by the Guarantor under this Lease nor to have any benefits of any securities held by the Landlord or of any payments, dividends or composition which the Landlords may receive until the whole claims of the Landlord against the Tenant are satisfied; and
11.5.	The Guarantor hereby waives any right to require the Landlord to proceed first against the Tenant or any of its assets and neither the non-exercise of or any delay in exercising on the part of the Landlord any right, power or privilege shall operate as a waiver of this guarantee nor shall any single or partial exercise of any right, power or privilege preclude the further exercise of such right or any other right, power or privilege.
 

12.	LAW OF SCOTLAND
This Lease shall be interpreted in accordance with the Law of Scotland and any dispute, difference or question of any kind which may arise between the parties shall be determined in accordance with the Law of Scotland.
13.	REGISTRATION
The parties hereby consent to registration hereof for preservation and execution: IN WITNESS WHEREOF
 
SCHEDULES

PART 1

THIS IS THE SCHEDULE REFERRED TO IN THE FOREGOING LEASE BETWEEN 0 AND 0RELATING TO 0

Part 1

The Property
[Consider definition in the light of the obligation to repair and to insure with regard to common parts]
 

PART 2

The Rights Granted
 

PART 3

The Exceptions and Reservations

1.	The right to enter upon the Property at reasonable times (upon prior appointment) to make an inventory of the Landlord’s fixtures and fittings,
2.	The right (but without implying any obligation upon the Landlord) to enter upon the Property at reasonable times upon prior notice (except in the case of emergency when no notice will be required) and to erect scaffolding on the Property for the purpose of:-
2.1.	inspecting, cleaning, repairing or renewing any part of the Property including any part of the Plant and Equipment and the Service Systems,
2.2.	inspecting, cleaning, repairing or renewing any part of the larger building or structure of which the Property forms part (if any) or any neighbouring property (including any part of which is common to or mutual with the Property; and
2.3.	installing (whether by way of replacement or extension, except extension resulting in a reduction in the area of the Property available for use by the Tenant or otherwise materially interfering with the Tenant's use of the Property) new or additional parts of any of the Service Systems;
2.4.	the Landlord making good all damage thereby caused to the Property and causing as little interference as reasonably practicable to the Tenant.
3.	The right to take into use all boundary walls of and Service Systems of the Property and to build upon, connect with, or otherwise use the same the Landlord procuring that there is made good all damage thereby occasioned to the Property and causing as little interference as reasonably practicable to the Tenant.
4.	The right to erect or to consent hereafter to any person erecting a new building or to alter any building for the time being on any land adjoining, neighbouring or opposite to the Property notwithstanding that such alteration or erection may diminish the access of light and air enjoyed by the Property and the right to deal with any property adjoining, opposite or near the Property as the Landlord may think fit; Provided always that, so far as reasonably practicable, no material impairment or interference is caused thereby to the Tenant’s use and enjoyment of the Property.
5.	A right of support shelter and protection for adjoining and adjacent properties from the Property.
6.	The right to maintain and use in, under and on the Property all existing channels, ventilation ducting, drains, sewers, pipes (including sprinkler systems), wires, cables, aerials or other conducting media, pumps, valves, meters and connections providing services to any larger building or structure of which the Property forms part or any neighbouring property whether or not used in common with the Property or any part thereof, together with a right of access to the same for the purposes of meter-reading, inspection, cleaning, maintenance, repairing and renewing and with power to the Landlord to alter same or the route of same (provided such alteration does not result in a material reduction in the area of the Property available for use by the Tenant or otherwise materially interfere with the Tenant's use of the Property) the Landlord making good all damage thereby occasioned to the Property and causing the least interference practicably possible to the Tenant's use and occupation of the Property.
 

PART 4

The Rent Review Provisions

1.	The annual rent payable from time to time under this Lease shall be reviewed on each and every one of the Rent Review Dates to be the greater of:- (i) the annual rent payable in the period immediately before the relevant Rent Review Date and (ii) such sum as shall represent the full market rent of the Property at the relevant Rent Review Date and the following provisions shall apply to any such review:-
1.1.	The full market rent of the Property at the relevant Rent Review Date shall be such amount as may be agreed between the Landlord and the Tenant or, failing such agreement, as determined in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 hereof;
1.2.	If the amount of the full market rent has not been agreed by the date occurring three months prior to the relevant Rent Review Date then the same shall be determined by an independent party (“the Surveyor”) (acting as an expert and not as an arbiter) who shall be an independent chartered surveyor who shall have had not less than five years experience in practice as a partner in a firm or as a Director in a company of Chartered Surveyors of standing and which surveyor  shall have had substantial recent experience in assessing the market rents of properties similar to the Property within the same geographical area and the Surveyor shall be nominated, failing agreement, by the Chairman for the time being of the Scottish Branch of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors on the application of the Landlord, whom failing, the Tenant.  The Landlord and the Tenant shall each be entitled to submit to such Surveyor written representations supporting their assessment of the full market rent.  The Certificate of such Surveyor as to such rent shall be final and binding on the parties to the effect that in the event of the rent specified in the said Certificate being more than the annual rent payable in the period immediately prior to the relevant Rent Review Date, the rent specified in the said Certificate shall become the rent payable under this Lease from and after the relevant Rent Review Date, the whole other terms and conditions of this Lease remaining in full force and effect.  In the event, however, of the rent specified in the said Certificate not being more than the annual rent payable in the period immediately prior to the relevant Rent Review Date (hereinafter called “the old rent”), the rent at the rate equivalent to the old rent shall continue to be the rent payable under this Lease from and after the relevant Rent Review Date.  The Landlord and the Tenant shall each be responsible for payment of their own expenses in regard to the determination of such full market rent and the expenses of such Surveyor in relation to the referral shall be paid according to the award of the Surveyor and, failing any such award, in equal shares;
1.3.	In the event of the full market rent not being agreed or determined as herein provided on or before the relevant Rent Review Date then:-
1.3.1.	In respect of the period of time beginning with the relevant Rent Review Date and ending on the rent payment day immediately following the date on which the Landlord and the Tenant shall agree the full market rent or, failing agreement, the date on which the decision of the Surveyor shall have been made and communicated to the Landlord and the Tenant (such period being hereinafter called “the said interval”), the annual rent payable by the Tenant under this Lease shall (subject to paragraph 1.3.2 below) be at the same annual rate as the old rent;  and
1.3.2.	At the expiry of the said interval if the annual rent payable as and from the relevant Rent Review Date as ascertained in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 of this Part of the Schedule (hereinafter called “the reviewed rent”) is greater than the old rent , a sum representing the difference between the old rent and the reviewed rent in respect of the said interval, together with interest thereon for the said interval at the rate of Two per centum per annum below the rate prescribed in this Lease for payment of interest on arrears of rent, shall forthwith be appropriately adjusted by a single payment from the Tenant to the Landlord.
2.	For the purposes of this Part of the Schedule, the expression “full market rent” shall mean the clear open market rent without taking a fine or premium at which the Property might reasonably be expected to be let at the relevant Rent Review Date having regard to open market rental values current at the relevant Rent Review Date for a period of years equal to (a) the number of years of the period of this Lease remaining unexpired at the relevant Rent Review Date or (b) ten years (whichever is the longer) by a willing landlord to a willing tenant on terms equivalent to those contained in this Lease (other than as to rent but including the provisions for the review of the rent with the same frequency and on the same conditions as herein contained) with vacant possession and 
2.1.	on the ASSUMPTIONS (if they are not facts)that:-
2.1.1.	the Property is fully fitted-out and fit for immediate occupation and use, 
2.1.2.	no work has been carried out to the Property by the Tenant or any sub-tenant which has diminished the rental value of the Property,
2.1.3.	the Property, if destroyed or damaged, has been duly reinstated,
2.1.4.	the Tenant has duly complied with all of its obligations under this Lease, 
2.1.5.	the willing tenant is able to recover Value Added Tax (if any) on the rent in full, and
2.1.6.	that the Property would be let upon terms that the willing tenant would commence paying rent immediately upon the relevant Rent Review Date and that such rent would not be discounted or reduced to reflect the absence of any rent free period or other concession or consideration which on a new letting of the Property might be granted to an incoming tenant, it being assumed that the willing tenant has been entitled to the benefit of the Property before the relevant Rent Review Date for a period reflecting the value of such rent free period or other concession or consideration, 
2.2.	but DISREGARDING any:-
2.2.1.	goodwill attributable to the Property by reason of any trade or business carried on therein by the Tenant or any permitted sub-tenant, 
2.2.2.	increase in rental value of the Property attributable to the existence of any improvements made to the Property after the commencement of this Lease carried out by the Tenant or any permitted sub-tenant except in pursuance of an obligation by the Tenant to the Landlord, 
2.2.3.	effect on rent of the fact that the Tenant may be or have been in possession of the Property, and 
2.2.4.	statutory restrictions on rent then in force;
3.	If at any relevant Rent Review Date the Landlord shall be obliged legally or otherwise to comply with any Act of Parliament, Statutory Order or stipulation dealing with the control of rent and which shall restrict or modify the right of the parties to determine the reviewed rent in accordance with the terms hereof then as at the date upon which such enactment is removed, relaxed or modified, there shall be an immediate review and the rent payable under this Lease from such immediate date of review until the next succeeding relevant Rent Review Date or the date of termination of this Lease (whichever shall occur first) shall be determined in like manner as the rent payable from each relevant Rent Review Date as hereinbefore provided;
4.	It is expressly agreed that acceptance by the Landlord at any time after the relevant Rent Review Date of (or demand by the Landlord at such time for) rent at the yearly rate payable immediately before such relevant Rent Review Date shall not be regarded as acceptance by the Landlord that such rent represents the open market rent of the Property as from such relevant Rent Review Date or as personally barring the Landlord from setting in motion at any time after any relevant Rent Review Date the machinery for review of rent or from collecting the rent as and from such relevant Rent Review Date all as hereinbefore provided for;  and
5.	Within one month after the rent has been reviewed as aforesaid, the Landlord and the Tenant shall enter into a Memorandum recording the review.  The Tenant shall be responsible for the Landlord’s proper legal expenses in connection with the preparation and completion of such Memorandum, together with the stamp duty land tax thereon (if any) and the cost of registering such Memorandum in the Books of Council and Session and the obtaining of two Extracts.
 
PART 5


Licensing Provisions

1.	To Transfer Licences at end of Lease
On the termination of this Lease whether by effluxion of time or otherwise the Tenant shall use its best endeavours to ensure that the Licence is assigned, endorsed, transferred and handed over to the Landlord or to whomsoever the Landlord may appoint and shall attend before the Licensing Board (if so required) and sign all notices, applications and consents and do all other acts and things which may be requisite at the termination of the Lease to transfer the Licence to the Landlord or whomsoever the Landlord may appoint.
2.	Landlord’s Right to renew and transfer Licences
In case the Tenant shall on being requested, refuse or shall neglect to renew the Licence or to transfer the same as aforesaid it shall be lawful for the Landlord (and the Landlord is hereby irrevocably empowered by the Tenant) to do all things necessary to effect such renewal or transfer of the Licence and to sign any application for transfer or renewal of the Licence for and on behalf and in the name of the Tenant and to appear before the Licensing Board or other appropriate authority either personally or by its solicitors or agents to apply for such renewal and to consent as the agent of the Tenant to the granting of such transfer being made to a new tenant or other occupier of the Property.
3.	Power of the Landlord to appeal
It shall be lawful for the Landlord at its expense and the Landlord is hereby irrevocably empowered by the Tenant in its name to appeal against any refusal by any authority to renew or transfer the Licence or against any matter in respect of which the Tenant is entitled to appeal or against any order made in respect of the Property or steps taken by the Licensing Board under s 39 of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 (but so that the Landlord shall be under no obligation so to do) and to do all acts or things necessary or proper in respect of such appeal.
4.	To give notice of complaints et cetera
The Tenant shall give written notice to the Landlord forthwith on receiving any summons, written warning, written notice or formal written complaint or application for review of the Licence or if any notice is received by the Tenant of an intention to oppose the renewal of the Licence and the Tenant shall act in all matters with regard to all such summonses, warnings, notices or complaints or applications and with regard to any refusal to renew the Licence relating to the Property as the Landlord shall direct.
5.	Not to imperil Licence
The Tenant shall conduct business on the Property in an orderly and proper manner so that nothing shall be done or omitted or suffered to be done or omitted whereby the Licence may be or become liable to be forfeited or refused renewal or the renewal or transfer thereof imperilled or whereby the trade or business conducted from the Property or the goodwill thereof may in any way be prejudicially affected or whereby the Tenant or any person holding the Licence on the Tenant’s behalf shall be convicted of any offence under any Act of Parliament for the time being in force relating to the Licence it being expressly agreed that any conviction of the Tenant or any such person as aforesaid for any offences under the Licensing Act or any statute for the time being in force regulating the trade of licensed victuallers shall in itself be conclusive evidence of a breach of this Clause.   
6.	To fulfil undertakings to Licensing Board
The Tenant shall fulfil any existing undertakings given to the Licensing Board and comply with any conditions attached to the Licence in respect of the Property and shall observe any lawful regulations as to the conduct of licensed premises from time to time made by the said Board in respect of the Property.
7.	To renew Licences et cetera
The Tenant shall apply for and use every endeavour to obtain a renewal of the Licence and shall neither apply for or make any endeavour to obtain any different or additional licence nor give any undertaking relating to the Property or the Licence thereof without the consent in writing of the Landlord; but if the Tenant is at any time requested to give any such undertakings the Tenant shall immediately give written notice of such request to the Landlord.

8.	Premises Licence
8.1.	In relation to a premises licence held in respect of the Property:-
8.1.1.	If any Licence relating to the Property shall be suspended;
8.1.2.	If the Tenant (or if more than one, either or any of them) is convicted of any offence under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976 or is convicted of any other criminal offence or does anything which in the opinion of the Landlord imperils the existence of or transfer of any Licence or any relevant permit held in respect of the Property or shall for any reason cease to be the holder of the Licence in respect of the Property
8.1.3.	If a premises licence ceases to exist in respect of the Property or if the premises licence ceases to be held other than by a party approved by the Landlord;
8.1.4.	If the appropriate Licensing Board takes any steps within the meaning of section 39 of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
8.1.5.	If a premises licence affecting the Property ceases to have effect.
8.1.6.	If the holder of the premises licence granted in relation to the Property dies, becomes incapable within the meaning of section 1(6) of The Adults with Incapacity  (Scotland) Act 2000,  becomes insolvent, or is dissolved all as set out in section 28(5) (b) - (e) of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
8.1.7.	If the holder of the premises licence affecting the Property gives notice or purports to give notice to surrender the premises licence in accordance with the provisions of section 28(6) of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
8.1.8.	If the premises manager ceases to be the holder of a personal licence;
8.1.9.	If the Tenant, the premises licence holder or the premises manager (or, if more than one either or any of them) is convicted of any offences under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
8.1.10.	If, before or after determination of this Lease, the Tenant or its nominee does not for any reason and upon the request by the Landlord transfer the premises licence to the Landlord or to whomsoever the Landlord may appoint.
8.1.11.	If any breach of the Tenant’s obligations has occurred entitling the Landlord to serve a notice of irritancy.
It shall be lawful for the Landlord (or any person nominated by the Landlord), by way of security, for performance of the Tenant’s obligations hereunder to be the Attorney of the Tenant in respect of the acts mentioned in Clause 8.2

8.2.	For the purposes of Clause 8.1 the acts shall comprise one or more of the following:-
8.2.1.	 To do all things necessary to transfer the premises licence to the Landlord or to whomsoever the Landlord may appoint or to apply for a premises licence which may include appearing personally or by its agent before the appropriate Licensing Board.
8.2.2.	To consent whether in writing or by personal appearance before the appropriate Licensing Board on behalf of the Tenant to a transfer of the premises licence being made to the Landlord or to whomsoever the Landlord may appoint.  
8.2.3.	To make representations on behalf of the Tenant in any proceedings for review of the premises Licence under Sections 36, 37 and/or 38 of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 and to have conduct of any proceedings for review of the premises Licence on the Tenant’s behalf and to sign such notices and documents as may be appropriate for that purpose.
8.2.4.	To appeal against any steps taken or proposed to be taken by the appropriate Licensing Board pursuant to the provisions of Sections 39 and/or 40 of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 and to have conduct of such appeal proceedings.
8.3.	If there is no premises licence for the Property the Tenant shall be obliged to apply for or procure an application to be made for and use all reasonable endeavours to obtain a premises licence in which there is a designated premises manager in accordance with the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005.
9.	Lease to Continue
In the event of temporary or permanent loss of the premises licence the Landlord may, at its option, treat this Lease as remaining in full force and effect and the Tenant shall be obliged to accept that this Lease shall continue in full force and effect notwithstanding the impact upon the permitted use under this Lease by virtue of the loss of any such licence.


 
LEASE

between

0

and

0















	Property:
	Entry Date: 
	Term:
	Guarantor
	Bank


2013




